IBX-11536: MCP Servers (#3106)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/ai/mcp/mcp_config.md

---
description: Configure an MCP server exposing built-in tools, or custom tools, prompts, and resources.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# MCP servers installation and configuration

[[= product_name =]]'s MCP Servers LTS Update package can provide [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AI agents.

## Installation

Install the LTS Update package with Composer:

```bash
composer require ibexa/mcp
```

> MCP Servers feature doesn't come with a default configuration.

Reviewer: Aside from predefined tools that one can utilize*

Author: ```suggestion
MCP Servers feature comes with [built-in tools](#built-in-tools) but doesn't come with a default configuration.
```

You have to create your own MCP servers through [their configuration](#mcp-server-configuration)

> and [enable JWT athentication for them](#jwt-mcp-firewall).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [enable JWT authentication for them](#jwt-mcp-firewall).
```

## Authentication configuration

### JWT MCP firewall

AI agents use JWT authentication against [[= product_name =]]'s  MCP servers.

In `config/packages/lexik_jwt_authentication.yaml`, [enable the `authorization_header` token extractor](development_security.md#jwt-authentication)
to allow the use of JWT token bearer in `Authorization` header.

In `config/packages/security.yaml`,

- uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_rest` firewall to allow the request of JWT tokens through REST or GraphQL

> - uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_mcp` firewall to allow the use of JWT authentication against MCP servers

Reviewer: this part was removed from recipes therefore there will be no `ibexa_jwt_mcp` configuration to be uncommented - as it's opt in package I assume it has to be added manually, wdyt?

Author: Some LTS Update seem to have recipe entries. Maybe it can be done. It should be investigated.

Reviewer 2: In theory, it should be doable with recipes - with the `add-lines` configurator.

Doc: https://github.com/symfony/flex/pull/975#:~:text=add%2Dlines%20Configurator

Example usage: https://github.com/symfony/recipes/blob/main/symfony/panther/1.0/manifest.json#L28

### Tools configuration

[Tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools) are the main capabilities of an MCP server,
they are the actions that an AI can call on the system.

!!! note "MCP server design best practice"

    An MCP server with too many tools makes it harder for the AI agent to choose the right one.
    Create several servers with specific sets of tools for different contexts and purposes.
    Focus on the needs and tasks of the human user actually prompting the AI agent when designing your MCP servers and capabilities, not on the technical possibilities.

There is two ways to associate tools with a server:

- `tools` in server configuration lists PHP classes (FQCN) from which **all** the `McpTool` attributes are associated with the server (for example, for [built-in tools](#built-in-tools) or third parties)
- `servers` argument in [`McpTool` attribute](mcp_usage.md#tools) associates the **specified** tool to servers

#### Built-in tools

MCP Servers LTS Update comes with the following built-in tools:

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools`
    - `list_languages`: Lists all languages in the current SiteAccess

>     - `list_content_translations`: Lists languages in which given content item has translations

Reviewer: https://github.com/ibexa/mcp/pull/8 another tool by @bnowak in progress, something to keep an eye on

Author: https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/3196/changes

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools`
    - `get_non_seo_content_ids`: Returns IDs of content items that are missing SEO optimization (no meta title tag)

``` yaml hl_lines="5-7"
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 4, 7) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 9, 11) =]]
                    # …
```

### Discovery cache

Discovery is cached to avoid scanning for capabilities on every request.

> A PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool must be provided for this caching.

Reviewer: worth mentioning that when using `tagaware.filesystem` cache in order to see changes we need to also clear `var/share`: https://symfony.com/blog/new-in-symfony-7-4-share-directory (something to verify)

Author: Good. I have it in https://ez-systems-developer-documentation--3106.com.readthedocs.build/en/3106/ai/mcp/mcp_usage/#create-capability-class but could be mentioned here…

---

> description: Configure an MCP server exposing built-in tools, or custom tools, prompts, and resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Configure an MCP server that exposes built-in and custom tools, prompts, and resources.
```

edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

> # MCP servers installation and configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Install and configure MCP Servers

> [[= product_name =]]'s MCP Servers LTS Update package can provide [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AI agents.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With [[= product_name =]]'s MCP Servers LTS Update package, you can provide [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AI agents.
```

Is "provide" the right word here? How about "expose"?

Author: ```suggestion
With [[= product_name =]]'s MCP Servers LTS Update package, you can expose [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AI agents.
```

## Installation

> Install the LTS Update package with Composer:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run the following command to install the package:
```

That's a standard phrase we use elsewhere.

```bash
composer require ibexa/mcp
```

MCP Servers feature comes with [built-in tools](#built-in-tools) but doesn't come with a default configuration.
You have to create your own MCP servers through [their configuration](#mcp-server-configuration)

> and [enable JWT authentication for them](#jwt-mcp-firewall).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You have to create your own MCP servers by [enabling JWT authentication for them](#jwt-mcp-firewall) and providing [their configuration](#mcp-server-configuration).
```

Author: Enabling auth doesn't create anything.

```suggestion
You have to create your own MCP servers by providing [their configuration](#mcp-server-configuration) and [enable JWT authentication for them](#jwt-mcp-firewall).
```

> ## Authentication configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Configure authentication
```

### JWT MCP firewall

AI agents use JWT authentication against [[= product_name =]]'s  MCP servers.

In `config/packages/lexik_jwt_authentication.yaml`, [enable the `authorization_header` token extractor](development_security.md#jwt-authentication)

> to allow the use of JWT token bearer in `Authorization` header.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In `config/packages/lexik_jwt_authentication.yaml`, [enable the `authorization_header` token extractor](development_security.md#jwt-authentication) to allow the use of JWT token bearer in `Authorization` header.
```

> In `config/packages/security.yaml`,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In `config/packages/security.yaml`, make the following changes:
```

> - uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_rest` firewall to allow the request of JWT tokens through REST or GraphQL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_rest` firewall to enable requesting JWT tokens through REST or GraphQL API.
```
When bullets are entire sentences, they call for an initial capital letter and a fullstop.

> - uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_mcp` firewall to allow the use of JWT authentication against MCP servers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_mcp` firewall to allow the use of JWT authentication against MCP servers.
```
When bullets are entire sentences, they call for an initiaal capital letter and a fullstop.

Notice that you don't need to activate JWT authentication for the REST API or the GraphQL API.

You can now request JWT tokens to use with your MCP servers.
See examples of JWT token requests
in [REST JWT authentication](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-authentication),
in [GraphQL JWT authentication](graphql.md#jwt-authentication),

> or in [cURL test of MCP server](mcp_usage.md#curl-test).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! note "Authentication for the APIs"

    You don't need to activate JWT authentication for the REST or GraphQL API.
    
    For sample JWT token requests, see [REST JWT authentication](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-authentication), [GraphQL JWT authentication](graphql.md#jwt-authentication) and [cURL test of MCP server](mcp_usage.md#curl-test).
```

> or in [cURL test of MCP server](mcp_usage.md#curl-test).

Author: ```suggestion
!!! note "Authentication for the APIs"

    You don't need to activate JWT authentication for the REST or GraphQL API.
    
    For sample JWT token requests, see [REST JWT authentication](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-authentication), [GraphQL JWT authentication](graphql.md#jwt-authentication) and [cURL test of MCP server](mcp_usage.md#curl-test).
```

### Repository user

> - The user can generate a JWT token with their own account, or a secondary dedicated account, and pass the token to the MCP client.

Reviewer 3: Who is the "user"? Like an end user? Is there one particular user who does it or are there many? Or is it a logical user?

I would expand this paragraph to be clearer:

"MCP servers execute actions using the permissions of the authenticated repository user that is associated with the JWT token.

This repository user can be:

- an individual user account (for example, of an editor or administrator)
- a dedicated account created specifically for AI integrations

The repository user can generate a JWT token with their own account, or a secondary dedicated account, and pass the token to the MCP client.
A gateway can use a dedicated shared _repository?_ user to generate a JWT token and establish the connection.
"

Author: Done in 59cf6c44d0d815954243f469e1330bf299996a16

- A gateway can use a dedicated shared user to generate a JWT token and establish the connection.

## MCP server configuration

> MCP servers are defined per repository and assigned per SiteAccess scope.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You define MCP servers within a repository configuration and then assign those servers to specific SiteAccess scopes.
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 1, 8) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 12, 15) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 29, 33) =]]
```

Routes are built automatically from MCP server `path` configs.
Those routes are identified as `ibexa.mcp.<server_identifier>`.

> List them by running `php bin/console debug:router --siteaccess=<within_scope_siteaccess> ibexa.mcp`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can list them by running the following command:

`php bin/console debug:router --siteaccess=<within_scope_siteaccess> ibexa.mcp`
```

### MCP server options

| Option                                                                                                          | Type    | Required | Default | Description                                                      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `path`                                                                                                          | string  | Yes      |         | MCP server endpoint path (appended to SiteAccess-aware base URL) |

> | `enabled`                                                                                                       | boolean | No       | `false` | Whether the server is enabled                                    |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `enabled`                                                                                                       | boolean | No       | `false` | Server state: decides whether it is enabled or disabled                                   |
```

| `version`                                                                                                       | string  | No       | `1.0.0` | MCP server version                                               |
| [`description`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#implementation-description)     | string  | No       | `null`  | Server implementation description                                |

> | [`instructions`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#initializeresult-instructions) | string  | No       | `null`  | Prompt-like instructions dedicated to the AI agent               |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [`instructions`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#initializeresult-instructions) | string  | No       | `null`  | Prompt-like instructions provided to the AI agent               |
```

| [`tools`](#tools-configuration)                                                                                 | string  | No       | `[]`    | List of tool classes                                             |
| <nobr>[`discovery_cache`](#discovery-cache)</nobr>                                                              | string  | Yes      |         | PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool service identifier                    |
| [`session`](#session-storage)                                                                                   | object  | Yes      |         | Session storage configuration                                    |

> Notice that a server is disabled by default, it needs to be explicitly enabled.

Reviewer 3: Does it mean this?

```suggestion
!!! note "New servers are disabled by default"

    After you define a server, it remains disabled until you explicitly enable it.
```

> ### Tools configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Tool configuration

[Tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools) are the main capabilities of an MCP server,

> they are the actions that an AI can call on the system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The capabilities of an MCP server are called [tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools).
They are the actions that an AI agent can invoke on the system.
```

Author: @dabrt 

Tools is the "main" capability but prompts, resources, and resource templates are capabilities too. You can build an MCP server without even tools. "main" is finally my own judgement here.

```suggestion
[Tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools) are part of the capabilities of an MCP server.
They are the actions that an AI can call on the system.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The main capabilities of an MCP server are called [tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools).
They are the actions that an AI agent can invoke on the system.
```

> !!! note "MCP server design best practice"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! note "MCP server design best practices"
```

    An MCP server with too many tools makes it harder for the AI agent to choose the right one.
    Create several servers with specific sets of tools for different contexts and purposes.

>     Focus on the needs and tasks of the human user actually prompting the AI agent when designing your MCP servers and capabilities, not on the technical possibilities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Avoid creating MCP servers with large tool sets.
    Too many tools make it more difficult for the AI agent to select the appropriate action.
    Instead, create multiple MCP servers with specific sets of tools dedicated to specific contexts or use cases.
    When designing MCP servers, focus on the needs and tasks of the human user who actually interacts with the AI agent rather than exploring every technical capability.
```

> There is two ways to associate tools with a server:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two ways to associate tools with a server:
```

- `tools` in server configuration lists PHP classes (FQCN) from which **all** the `McpTool` attributes are associated with the server (for example, for [built-in tools](#built-in-tools) or third parties)

> - `servers` argument in [`McpTool` attribute](mcp_usage.md#tools) associates the **specified** tool to servers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- By defining PHP classes (FQCNs) in the server's configuration `tools` in server configuration lists PHP classes (FQCN). All tools marked with the `McpTool` attribute in those classes are automatically associated with the server (for example, for [built-in](#built-in-tools) or third party tools).
- By using the `servers` argument in [`McpTool` attribute](mcp_usage.md#tools) to explicitly associate a specific tool with MCP servers.
```

Author: ```suggestion
By listing PHP classes (FQCNs) in the server's configuration `tools`. All tools marked with the `McpTool` attribute in those classes are automatically associated with the server (for example, for [built-in](#built-in-tools) or third party tools).
- By using the `servers` argument in [`McpTool` attribute](mcp_usage.md#tools) to explicitly associate a specific tool with MCP servers.
```

#### Built-in tools

MCP Servers LTS Update comes with the following built-in tools:

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools`
    - `list_languages`: Lists all languages in the current SiteAccess

>     - `list_content_translations`: Lists languages in which given content item has translations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `list_languages` - lists all languages in the current SiteAccess
    - `list_content_translations` - lists languages in which given content item has translations
```

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools`

>     - `get_non_seo_content_ids`: Returns IDs of content items that are missing SEO optimization (no meta title tag)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - `get_non_seo_content_ids` - returns IDs of content items that are missing SEO optimization (no meta title tag)
```

``` yaml hl_lines="5-7"
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 4, 7) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 9, 11) =]]
                    # …
```

### Discovery cache

Discovery is cached to avoid scanning for capabilities on every request.

> A PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool must be provided for this caching.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You must provide a PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool for this caching.
```

> For example, a dedicated Redis/Valkey could be set up:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, you could set up a dedicated Redis/Valkey:
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 17, 17) =]]
```

> For production cluster, a Redis/Valkey cache pool is recommended to share this cache.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a production cluster, it is recommended to use a Redis/Valkey cache pool so the cache can be shared by all nodes.
```

> When changes are made, clear the cache pool. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Clear the cache pool after making changes:
```

```bash
php bin/console cache:pool:clear cache.redis.mcp
```

### Session storage

> MCP servers store session data their own way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MCP servers store session data in their own way.
```

#### Options

| Option      | Type    | Default  | Description                                       |
|-------------|---------|----------|---------------------------------------------------|
| `type`      | enum    | `memory` | Session store type: `psr16`, `file`, or `memory`  |

> | `service`   | string  | `null`   | PSR-16 cache service ID for `psr16` session store |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `service`   | string  | `null`   | PSR-16 cache service ID for the `psr16` session store |
```

> | `prefix`    | string  | `mcp_`   | Key prefix for `psr16` session store              |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `prefix`    | string  | `mcp_`   | Key prefix for the `psr16` session store              |
```

> | `directory` | string  | `null`   | Directory path for `file` session store           |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `directory` | string  | `null`   | Directory path for the `file` session store           |
```

| `ttl`       | integer | `3600`   | Session TTL in seconds                            |

> In production, [`psr16`](#psr-16) with Redis/Valkey is recommended like for [regular sessions](clustering.md#shared-sessions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In production, it’s recommended to use [`psr16`](#psr-16) with Redis/Valkey, just like with [regular sessions](clustering.md#shared-sessions).
```

#### PSR-16

Sessions are stored with a PSR-16 compatible cache implementation.

> It requires `service` option pointing to a valid cache service ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It requires that a `service` option points to a valid cache service ID.
```

> And optionally a more specific `prefix` option than the default `mcp_` to avoid key collisions with other cache usages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Optionally, you could use a more specific `prefix` option than the default `mcp_` to avoid key collisions with other cache usages.
```

> Suitable for production.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such configuration is suitable for production environments.
```

Is this what you meant?

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 18, 21) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 34, 43) =]]
```

#### File

Sessions are persisted to the filesystem.
It requires directory option to be set.

> Suitable for development.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sessions are stored on the filesystem/
This requires that you configure a directory.
Such setup is suitable for development environments.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Sessions are stored on the filesystem.
This requires that you configure a directory.
Such setup is suitable for development environments.
```

In this example, sessions are stored in `var/cache/<environment>/mcp/sessions/` directory

> (for example, `var/cache/dev/mcp/session/` in `dev` environment and `var/cache/prod/mcp/sessions/` in `prod` environment):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, sessions are stored in the `var/cache/<environment>/mcp/sessions/` directory (for example, `var/cache/dev/mcp/session/` for the `dev` environment, and `var/cache/prod/mcp/sessions/` for the `prod` environment):
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 23, 25) =]]
```

#### Memory

Sessions are stored in memory.
Suitable for development.

> It might not work with containers like Docker/DDEV.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such setup is suitable for development environments.
It may fail to work with containers such as Docker or DDEV.
```

## Configure authentication

### JWT MCP firewall

AI agents use JWT authentication against [[= product_name =]]'s  MCP servers.

In `config/packages/lexik_jwt_authentication.yaml`, [enable the `authorization_header` token extractor](development_security.md#jwt-authentication) to allow the use of JWT token bearer in `Authorization` header.

In `config/packages/security.yaml`, make the following changes:

- Uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_rest` firewall to enable requesting JWT tokens through REST or GraphQL API.
- Add the `ibexa_jwt_mcp` firewall to allow the use of JWT authentication against MCP servers.

``` yaml hl_lines="4-9"
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/config/packages/mcp.security.yaml') =]]
```

!!! note "Authentication for the APIs"

    You don't need to activate JWT authentication for the REST or GraphQL API.
    
    For sample JWT token requests, see [REST JWT authentication](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-authentication), [GraphQL JWT authentication](graphql.md#jwt-authentication) and [cURL test of MCP server](mcp_usage.md#perform-curl-test).

### Repository user

> The AI agent authenticate against the MCP server with a JWT token generated for a specific repository user account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The AI agents authenticate against the MCP server with a JWT token generated for a specific repository user account.
```

- By using the `servers` argument in [`McpTool` attribute](mcp_usage.md#tools) to explicitly associate a specific tool with MCP servers.

#### Built-in tools

MCP Servers LTS Update comes with the following built-in tools:

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools`
    - `list_languages` - lists all languages in the current SiteAccess
    - `list_content_translations` - lists languages in which given content item has translations
- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools`
    - `get_non_seo_content_ids` - returns IDs of content items that are missing SEO optimization (no meta title tag)

``` yaml hl_lines="5-7"
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 4, 7) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 9, 11) =]]
                    # …
```

### Discovery cache

Discovery is cached to avoid scanning for capabilities on every request.
You must provide a PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool for this caching.

For example, you could set up a dedicated Redis/Valkey:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 17, 17) =]]
```

> For a production cluster, it is recommended to use a Redis/Valkey cache pool so the cache can be shared by all nodes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a production cluster, it's recommended to use a Redis/Valkey cache pool so the cache can be shared by all nodes.
```

| Option            | Type    | Required | Default | Description                                   |
|-------------------|---------|----------|---------|-----------------------------------------------|
| `path`            | string  | Yes      |         | MCP server endpoint path                      |
| `enabled`         | boolean | No       | `false` | Whether the server is enabled                 |
| `version`         | string  | No       | `1.0.0` | MCP server version                            |
| `description`     | string  | No       | `null`  | Human-readable server description             |
| `instructions`    | string  | No       | `null`  | Instructions dedicated for LLM interaction    |
| `tools`           | string  | No       | `[]`    | List of tool classes                          |
| `discovery_cache` | string  | Yes      |         | PSR-6 ou PSR-16 cache pool service identifier |
| `session`         | object  | Yes      |         | Session storage configuration                 |

Notice that a server is disabled by default, it needs to be explicitly enabled.

### Tools configuration

TODO: Tools are… (VS Prompt templates are… VS Resources are…)

> You can create your own tools, see [MCP server capabilities](#mcp-server-capabilities).

Author: ```suggestion
There is two ways to associate tools with a server:

- `tools` in server configuration lists classes from which **all** the `McpTool` attributes are associated with the server
- `servers` argument in `McpTool` attribute associated the **specified** tool to servers 
```

Ibexa DXP come with several built-in tool classes:

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools`
    - `list_languages`: TODO
    - `list_content_translations`: TODO
- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools`
    - `get_non_seo_content_ids`: TODO

```yaml
                    tools:
                        - Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools
                        - Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools
```

> ### MCP server discovery cache

Author: ````suggestion
```

You can create your own tools, see [MCP server capabilities](#mcp-server-capabilities).
You can find a `servers` usage example in the [Create tool class](#create-tool-class) section of the [example](#example).

### MCP server discovery cache
````

A PHP class implementing MCP server capabilities like tools, prompts, or resources, must:

- implements [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) to be scanned for capabilities
- uses attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to define capabilities.
- TODO: be added to an MCP server configuration

### Tools

The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpTool` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) declared a method as an MCP tool.
It has several arguments to describe the tool usage and output:

- `name` (optional): the name of the tool - if not set, the function name is used as the tool name
- `description` (optional): a human-readable description of the tool, useful for the LLM to understand the tool purpose and eventually choose it when it matches the prompt intent
- `inputSchema` (optional): for JSON object output, an associative array describing this object

> - `annotations` (optional): a [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance 

Author: ```suggestion
- `annotations` (optional): a [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance 
- `servers` (optional): an array of identifiers of servers proposing this tool
```

## Example

### Configure MCP server

This example introduce an `example` MCP server with a single `greet` tool.
It's enabled on all SiteAccesses.
It's accessible with the path `/mcp/example` (for example, on `http://localhost/mcp/example` and `http://localhost/admin/mcp/example`).
It uses files for both discovery cache and session storage.

In a new `config/packages/mcp.yaml` file, the configuration of the MCP server:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/mcp/config/packages/mcp.yaml') =]]
```

### Create tool class

Then, a `McpCapabilityInterface` containing a `greetByName` function with a `McpTool` attribute,

> the `App\Mcp\ExampleTools` class listed in the server's `tools`:

Author: ```suggestion
Then, an `McpCapabilityInterface` containing a function with an `McpTool` attribute associating it to the `example` server as `greet` tool:
```

---
description: Configure an MCP server exposing built-in or custom tools, prompts, and resources.
month_change: true
---

> # MCP servers configuration

Reviewer 2: Is the package included out of the box, no `composer require` needed?

Author: Moved to LTS Update in cacad72ff999f289b88a9623024793002f668131

> # MCP servers configuration

Reviewer 2: My first reaction is that you could extract a couple of articles from it, because it's very long and contains a lot of MCP Info from different areas.

Example split:

- Set up MCP servers (or Install MCP servers):
  - composer require (if needed)
  - JWT authentication config
  - initial configuration to make it work
- Configure MCP Servers
     - Full YAML config reference
 - Using MCP servers
     - How to send a request to a tool
     - how to add it in Copilot CLI
 - Extend MCP servers (or "Customize MCP servers", or something like this)
    - Custom tools
    - Custom Prompts

Author: There is no "initial configuration to make it work"
There is no default server. You have to configure your own, and to do so, considere the whole reference.

There are few built-in tools. "How to send a request to a tool" and "How to add it in Copilot CLI" could be done with a server only having the built-in tools. But, I would have to repeat myself as testing your own custom tools is important and more interesting.

I will cut in half as a start and see how it looks…

Author: It was cut in half, see https://ez-systems-developer-documentation--3106.com.readthedocs.build/en/3106/ai/mcp/mcp/
@mnocon Are the pages still too long?

> [[= product_name =]] can provide [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[[= product_name =]] can provide [MCP servers](mcp_guide.md) to external AI agents.
```
Or AI applications.

In `config/packages/lexik_jwt_authentication.yaml`, [enable the `authorization_header` token extractor](development_security.md#jwt-authentication)
to allow the use of JWT token bearer in `Authorization` header.

In `config/packages/security.yaml`,

- uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_rest` firewall to allow the request of JWT tokens through REST or GraphQL
- uncomment the `ibexa_jwt_mcp` firewall to allow the use of JWT authentication against MCP servers

Notice that you don't need to activate JWT authentication for the REST API or the GraphQL API.

You can now request JWT tokens to use with your MCP servers.
See examples of JWT token requests
in [REST JWT authentication](rest_api_authentication.md#jwt-authentication),
in [cURL test of MCP server](#curl-test),
in [GraphQL JWT authentication](graphql.md#jwt-authentication),
or in [MCP Inspector test](#mcp-inspector-test) GraphIQL example.

### Repository user

- The user can generate a JWT token with their own account, or a secondary dedicated account, and pass the token to the MCP client.
- A gateway can use a dedicated shared user to generate a JWT token and establish the connection.

## MCP server configuration

> MCP servers are configured per repository then enabled per SiteAccess scope.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MCP servers are defined per repository and assigned per SiteAccess scope.
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 1, 8) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 12, 15) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 29, 33) =]]
```

Routes are built automatically from MCP server `path` configs.
Those routes are identified as `ibexa.mcp.<server_identifier>`.

> They can be listed and checked with `php bin/console debug:router --siteaccess=<within_scope_siteaccess> ibexa.mcp`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
List them by running `php bin/console debug:router --siteaccess=<within_scope_siteaccess> ibexa.mcp`.
```

### MCP server options

| Option            | Type    | Required | Default | Description                                   |
|-------------------|---------|----------|---------|-----------------------------------------------|

> | `path`            | string  | Yes      |         | MCP server endpoint path                      |

Reviewer 2: Note about the path being a suffix, and the route itself is SA-aware?

| `enabled`         | boolean | No       | `false` | Whether the server is enabled                 |
| `version`         | string  | No       | `1.0.0` | MCP server version                            |

> | `description`     | string  | No       | `null`  | Human-readable server description             |

Reviewer 2: I don't see the difference between description and instructions, how they should be used. Is this explained in the MCP protocol spec?

In the example, we have:
> instructions: 'Use this server to greet someone.'

For tools, we have:
> `description` (optional): a human-readable description of the tool, useful for the LLM to understand the tool purpose and eventually choose it when it matches the prompt intent

I wouldn't use the "human-readable" label, because for me it's confusing who is the intended audience - people or robots.

Who is supposed to read the description (human, AI agent, both) and who is supposed to read the instructions?

Based on which field (or both?) does AI agent make the decision?

Author: If you look at the initialization example, you have 

```
    "serverInfo": {
      "name": "example",
      "version": "1.0.0",
      "description": "Example MCP Server"
    },
    "instructions": "Use this server to greet someone."
```

This isn't a tool desc, it's a server desc.

Still, the definition of each doesn't help a lot.

- https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#implementation-description
- https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#initializeresult-instructions

I would say that the `instruction` is a prompt-like AI agent oriented how-to while the description is more generic both human and machine oriented thingy.

Author: Reworked with links to the official definitions in c7937ee7ca8f5e82277bf76b18d8375b72bd016c

| `instructions`    | string  | No       | `null`  | Instructions dedicated for LLM interaction    |

> | `tools`           | string  | No       | `[]`    | List of tool classes                          |

Reviewer 2: Link to tools section from there.

> | `discovery_cache` | string  | Yes      |         | PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool service identifier |

Reviewer 2: Link to discovery cache section from here

> | `session`         | object  | Yes      |         | Session storage configuration                 |

Reviewer 2: As above

> Notice that a server is disabled by default, it needs to be explicitly enabled.

Reviewer 2: Is the default value by accident or is it a concious decision? 

Given that you have to define the server manually, you usually want it enabled?

I think this is a potential trap for developers.

@barw4 perhaps we could change this default to `true` to improve DX?

### Tools configuration

[Tools](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/tools) are the main capabilities of an MCP server,
they are the actions that an AI can call on the system.

!!! note "MCP server design best practice"

>     An MCP server with too many tools doesn't help the AI to choose the right one.

Reviewer 2: Please refer to AI as AI agent or AI application (let's pick one and choose it consistently)

>     An MCP server with too many tools doesn't help the AI to choose the right one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    An MCP server with too many tools makes it harder for the AI agent to choose the right one.
```
The negation is not needed

    Create several servers with specific sets of tools for different contexts and purposes.

>     Focus on AI's user needs and task when designing your servers and capabilities, not on the technical possibilities.

Reviewer 2: "AI's user needs" is antrophomizing the AI too much.

In general, I suggest refering to AI as "AI agent" or "AI application" (as the MCP spec), only "AI"

Author: ```suggestion
    Focus on the needs and tasks of the human user actually prompting the AI agent when designing your MCP servers and capabilities, not on the technical possibilities.
```

There is two ways to associate tools with a server:

- `tools` in server configuration lists PHP classes (FQCN) from which **all** the `McpTool` attributes are associated with the server
- `servers` argument in `McpTool` attribute associated the **specified** tool to servers

#### Built-in tools

> [[= product_name =]] come with several built-in tool classes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[[= product_name =]] come with the following built-in tools:
```

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\TranslationTools`
    - `list_languages`: Lists all languages in the current SiteAccess

>     - `list_content_translations`: Lists languages which have translations for a given content item

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `list_content_translations`: Lists languages in which given content item has translations
```
Content items have translations, not languages?

Author: @mnocon
It's like you've been heard:
https://github.com/ibexa/mcp/pull/8
https://github.com/ibexa/documentation-developer/pull/3196/changes

- `Ibexa\Mcp\Tool\SeoTools`
    - `get_non_seo_content_ids`: Returns IDs of content items that are missing SEO optimization (no meta title tag)

> ``` yaml

Reviewer 2: I didn't understand this example, it's too simplified.

The first example shows a structure:

<img width="962" height="484" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/49e7f9ef-b594-4e97-bdc4-b6861fd64c28" />

But there's no `tools` there - so when I get to this example, I don't know where this part goes.

Author: More context shown in 7eef300961255e03a2683f0a5c25b532e35d3f96

```

### Discovery cache

Discovery is cached to avoid scanning for capabilities on every request.
A PSR-6 or PSR-16 cache pool must be provided for this caching.

For example, a dedicated Redis/Valkey could be set up:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 17, 17) =]]
```

### Session storage

MCP servers store session data their own way.

#### Options

| Option      | Type    | Default  | Description                                       |
|-------------|---------|----------|---------------------------------------------------|
| `type`      | enum    | `memory` | Session store type: `psr16`, `file`, or `memory`  |
| `service`   | string  | `null`   | PSR-16 cache service ID for `psr16` session store |
| `prefix`    | string  | `mcp_`   | Key prefix for `psr16` session store              |
| `directory` | string  | `null`   | Directory path for `file` session store           |
| `ttl`       | integer | `3600`   | Session TTL in seconds                            |

#### PSR-16

Sessions are stored with a PSR-16 compatible cache implementation.
It requires `service` option pointing to a valid cache service ID.

> And optionally a more specific `prefix` option than the default `mcp_` to avoid key collisions with other cache usages.

Reviewer 2: In practice, does each server need their own prefix to avoid collisions?

Author: Sharing PSR-16 among several MCP servers is one of the "other cache usages". I was also thinking about PHP sessions, content cache, or even other application that could use the same Redis/Valkey server.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 18, 21) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 34, 43) =]]
```

#### File

Sessions are persisted to the filesystem. it requires directory option to be set.

In this example, sessions are stored in `var/cache/<environment>/mcp/sessions/` directory
(for example, `var/cache/dev/mcp/session/` in `dev` environment and `var/cache/prod/mcp/sessions/` in `prod` environment):

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 23, 25) =]]
```

#### Memory

> Sessions are stored in memory. Suitable for development and STDIO transport.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what STDIO transport means in this context - and given that it's good for development, are there any workaround needed to make it work with ddev?

Author: I don't know about DDEV.
I guess a Docker container doesn't really have memory, so it's hard for an app to access it.
A bit like it doesn't have CPUs (zetacomponents/SystemInformation#10)

@barw4 Do you remember what you meant by "STDIO transport" in ibexa/mcp#1 "Memory (default)" description?

Reviewer: Resolved via Slack

It might not work with containers like Docker/DDEV.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.matrix.yaml', 27, 28) =]]
```

## MCP server capabilities

The [[= product_name =]] MCP server framework (`ibexa/mcp`) is built on top of [the official PHP SDK for MCP (`mcp/sdk`)](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk)

A PHP class implementing MCP server capabilities like tools, prompts, or resources, must:

> - implements [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) to be scanned for capabilities

Author: ```suggestion
- implement [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\McpCapabilityInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-McpCapabilityInterface.html) to be scanned for capabilities
```

> - uses attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to define capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- use attributes from the [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute` namespace](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/namespaces/ibexa-contracts-mcp-attribute.html) to define capabilities.
```

### Tools

The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpTool` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) declares a method as an MCP tool.
It has several arguments to describe the tool usage and output:

> - `servers` (optional): an array of identifiers of servers proposing this tool - for more information, see [tools configuration](#tools-configuration)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `servers` (optional): an array of identifiers of servers this tool is assigned to - for more information, see [tools configuration](#tools-configuration)
```

- `name` (optional): the name of the tool - if not set, the function name is used as the tool name

> - `description` (optional): a human-readable description of the tool, useful for the LLM to understand the tool purpose and eventually choose it when it matches the prompt intent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `description` (optional): description of the tool, used by the AI agent to understand the tool's purpose
```

- `icons` (optional): an array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `outputSchema` (optional): for JSON object output, an associative array describing this object

> - `annotations` (optional): a [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to expand on this - `openWorldHint` is an interesting option.

Is there an external doc we could here for more info on this?

Author: ```suggestion
- `annotations` (optional): a [`Mcp\Schema\ToolAnnotations`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/ToolAnnotations.php) instance - for more information, see [`ToolAnnotations` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/schema#toolannotations)
```

> - `meta` (optional): a rarely used free-form array for any additional metadata - for more information, see [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `meta` (optional): a free-form array for any additional metadata. For more information, see [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)
```
I think the spec is still young, maybe the usages will grow with time 😅

An `inputSchema` is automatically built from the function arguments and their types.
To override or complement the automatically generated input schema,
you can use a DocBlock comment with `@param` tags to add descriptions,
or use the [`Schema` attribute](https://github.com/php-mcp/server#-schema-generation-and-validation).
If an argument is an [enum](https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.types.enumerations.php), its possible values are listed in the schema ([`UntitledSingleSelectEnumSchema`](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#untitledsingleselectenumschema)).

### Prompts

MCP servers can also provide [prompt templates](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts) to guide the user interacting with the AI having this MCP server at its disposal.

> The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpPrompt` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) declared a method as returning a prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`Ibexa\Contracts\Mcp\Attribute\McpPrompt` attribute](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Mcp-Attribute-McpTool.html) defines a method as returning a prompt.
```
or declares, but I prefer defines

It has several arguments to describe the prompt usage:

- `servers`: an array of identifiers of servers proposing this prompt - notice that this is required for prompts
- `name` (optional): the name of the prompt - if not set, the function name is used as the prompt name
- `description` (optional): a human-readable description of the prompt
- `icons` (optional): an array of [`Mcp\Schema\Icon`](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/php-sdk/blob/main/src/Schema/Icon.php) instances - for more information, see [`icons` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#icons)
- `meta` (optional): a rarely used free-form array for any additional metadata - for more information, see [`_meta` specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/basic/index#_meta)

An `arguments` array is automatically built from the function arguments and their types.

> Those prompt arguments must be strings (to respect the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The prompt arguments must be strings (to respect the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams)).
```

> Those prompt arguments must be strings (to respect the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams)).

Reviewer 2: Not sure if I understand it correctly - a function defined as a Prompt might only have string arguments?

Author: Yes, you can't pass an object nor an array. You can pass scalars as string.

While a tool can have complexe structure as soon as described in its inputSchema.

A prompt doesn't have a schema. It's a list of named arguments each expecting a string value.
Especially because they're injected in the prompt's placeholders and there shouldn't be any complexity or computation.

Author: ```suggestion
The prompt's function arguments must be strings (to respect the [`GetPromptRequestParams` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#getpromptrequestparams)).
```

To add descriptions (as in the [`PromptArgument` schema](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/schema#promptargument)), use a DocBlock comment with `@param` tags.

## Example

To focus on the MCP server configuration and capabilities creation, this example doesn't even interact with [[= product_name =]] repository.

### User account

In this example, the MCP server uses JWT tokens created with a dedicated account.

In [[= product_name =]]'s back office, create a user, for example, in **Guest accounts** user group, with login `ibexa-example`, and password `Ibexa-3xample`.

### Configure MCP server

This example introduce an `example` MCP server with a single `greet` tool.
It's enabled on the default repository and all SiteAccesses.
It's accessible with the path `/mcp/example` (for example, on `http://localhost/mcp/example` and `http://localhost/admin/mcp/example`).
It uses files for both discovery cache and session storage.
(Redis/Valkey would probably be better for session storage in production, but file storage is easier for this example and testing.)

> In a new `config/packages/mcp.yaml` file, the configuration of the MCP server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a new `config/packages/mcp.yaml` file, define a new MCP server for the `default` repository and assign it to all SiteAccesses:
```

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 63, 76) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 129, 148) =]]
```

The [list of prompts](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/latest/server/prompts#listing-prompts):

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 78, 85) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 149, 172) =]]
```

The `greet` [prompt obtainment](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/server/prompts#getting-a-prompt):

``` bash
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh', 87, 100) =]]
```

``` json
[[= include_code('code_samples/mcp/mcp.sh.output.txt', 173, 187) =]]
```

### MCP Inspector test

To test your server, you can use the [MCP Inspector](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/docs/tools/inspector).
It's even possible to use it as a DDEV add-on with [`craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector`](https://github.com/craftpulse/ddev-mcp-inspector).
You still need to ask for a JWT token through REST or GraphQL, and use it in the MCP Inspector configuration to connect to your server.

> #### JWT token obtained through REST documentation

Reviewer 2: I feel this part could be extracted to https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/api/rest_api/rest_api_authentication/#usage-example and https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/api/graphql/graphql/#jwt-authentication ?

I mean, let's expand the current sections and link to them, instead of duplicating it
